Japan's campaign of expansion through Asia was a decade old by the time of the attack on Pearl Harbor. The Kwantung Army invaded Manchuria in 1931 and consolidated its hold on the province within a year. It invaded Rehe province in 1933 and over subsequent years occupied much of Inner Mongolia. The oil, gold, and iron resources thus annexed allowed the increase of Japan's army, and also its imperial ambitions, which came to embrace rulership of East Asia. In an effort to crush the nearest obstacle to that ambition, Japan launched a campaign against the nationalist Chinese forces at Shanghai in 1937, following with the invasion of Nanking. The assault, rape, and murder of civilians in these battles reached the international press and elicited shocked replies from various leaders, including Franklin Roosevelt.[cite:For a swift summary of Japan's expansion see @overyBloodRuinsGreat2021 32--47]

In an October 1937 speech at Chicago, Roosevelt reminded listeners that the current "reign of terror and international lawlessness," which included the German--Soviet proxy war in Spain and the Italian assault on Ethiopia as well as Japan's depredations, violated the 1928 Kellogg-Briand Pact and had "reached a stage where the very foundations of civilization are seriously threatened. . . . Without a declaration of war and without warning or justification of any kind, civilians, including vast numbers of women and children, are being ruthlessly murdered with bombs from the air."[cite:@rooseveltOuterlinkBridgeDedication1937]

Roosevelt had been making much the same argument against Japan's expansion, and other wars of conquest overseas, for years. Before his first inauguration to the presidency, he joined outgoing Secretary of State Henry Stimson in a statement of support for the Hoover administration's policy of refusing to recognize the legitimacy of territorial conquest. Beyond non-recognition, Stimson and Roosevelt agreed on the desirability of bringing economic force to bear against aggressor nations like Japan, and proposed to Congress a measure that would give the president discretion to impose embargo against such violators of the international order. Roosevelt believed that "Japan would ultimately fail through the economic pressure against the job she had undertaken."[cite:@stimsonMemorandumConversationFranklin1933] An embargo might hasten Japanese realization of the inevitability of such a failure. Congress declined to give him that power in 1933, and indeed every later time the Roosevelt administration sought such authority through the 1930s; the legislature preferred to impose mandatory embargoes of both parties in a war---the aggressor and the victim---in a series of Neutrality Acts. Not until 1940 did
